## **Gradient Descent**
To understand the Gradient Descent, we first need to understand the concept of a gradient. Slope is the rate of change of a vertical variable w.r.t the horizontal variable i.e. the ratio of vertical distance to horizontal distance. Derivative is the instantaneous rate of change of the function at a point. In other words, the derivate of a function at a point is the slope of the tangent line where the point touches the curve of the function. Similarly, the **gradient** is the generalization of the derivative for the multi-variable functions. It represents the rate of change of the function w.r.t each variable. Mathematically, for the multi-variable function $f(x_1, x_2, ..., x_n)$, the gradient is denoted by $\nabla f$ and is defined as the vector composed of partial derivatives of the function w.r.t each variable. For example, the gradient of the function $f(x, y) = x^2 + y^2$ is $\nabla f = [2x, 2y]$. 

While training neural networks, we activate each neurons with parameterized weights along with some biases, then impose the sum of the output of each neurons by a non-linear activation functions like sigmoid or ReLU. At first, the values of the weights and biases are randomly initialized and the output of the network is also random which means the output of the model is far from the actual output. So, we need to use the **cost function** which basically tells how bad is the performance of our model. Mathematically, the cost function is the sum of the squared difference between the predicted output and the actual output. The sum is small when the model confidently gives the correct output but it's large when it seems the model really doesn't know what it's giving. When we say the model is training, we are actually trying to minimize the cost function in such a way that the predicted output is as close as possible to the actual output. Then, we use the novel method called **gradient descent** to minimize the cost function as quickly as possible. In calculus, **gradient** of the function gives the direction of steepest ascent to increase the function quickly. The negative of the gradient gives the direction of the steepest descent to decrease the function quickly. The **gradient** of the cost function basically tells which weights and biases of which neuron matters the most. Therefore, **gradient descent** is the iterative optimization algorithm that minimizes the cost function w.r.t the parameters of the model by moving in the direction of the negative gradient of the cost function. The learning rate is the hyperparameter that controls the step size of the gradient descent algorithm. 

## **Loss Function**
In simple words, the **cost function** is the average of the **loss function** of all the available data points. The **loss function** tells that how bad is the performance of our model for each single data point. 

While training the neural networks, we try to optimize the model parameters i.e. weights and biases in such a way that we get the right weights and biases so that our model can give correct output. Let's say we have a loss function for a single data point as $L(y, \hat{y}) = (y - \hat{y})^2$ where $y$ is the actual output and $\hat{y}$ is the predicted output, then we calculate the gradient of the loss function w.r.t the model parameters (weights and biases), we obtain the vector where each element of the vector tells how much the LF changes w.r.t the corresponding parameter. This gives us which parameter (weight or bias) matters the most to minimize the loss function. We repeat this process for all the data points with the objective to minimize the squared difference between the actual output and the predicted output. Therefore, the **loss function** is used to optimize the model parameters in such a way that the model can give the correct output.